# Exercise 3: Types

## Julia's type system

A type system describes a programming language's way of handling individual pieces of data and determining how to operate on them based on their type. Julia's type system is primarily _dynamic_, meaning that there is no need to tell Julia what type a particular value is. This is useful, in that you can write fairly complex applications without ever needing to specify types. You might, then, be tempted to disregard types as an advanced feature that you cannot be bothered right now. However, a good understanding of types is extremely helpful to mastering a functional language.

Julia's dynamic system is augmented by the ability to specify types where needed. This has two advantages. First, type specification leads to more efficient code. It will make your code more stable, much faster and much more robust. At the same time, unlike in a statically typed language, you do not need to get your head around types at the very beginning. Thus, you can treat this chapter not so much as a tutorial exercise but as a reference you can come back to every now and then.

It's important to understand that in Julia, _types belong to values, not variables_. It's also important to understand the hierarchy of types in Julia. Types in Julia are either abstract or concrete. Abstract types are the overarching, large kinds of data structure, from which concrete types derive. All concrete types derive from abstract types, and a concrete type may not be a subtype of another concrete type, while at the same time, abstract types cannot be directly invoked. If this feels incredibly convoluted, just bear with it for now. It will make much more sense once you get around to its practical implementations.


## Declaring and testing types

Julia's primary type operator is `::` (double-colons). It has three different uses, all fairly important, and it's crucial that you understand the different functions that `::` fulfills in the different contexts.

### Declaring a (sub)type

In the context of a _statement_, such as a function, `::` appended to a variable means 'this variable is always to be of this type'. In the following, we will create a function that returns `32` as `Int8` (for now, let's ignore that we don't know much about functions and we don't quite know what integer types exist – these will all be explained shortly!).

	julia> function restrict_this_integer()
	       	x::Int8 = 32
	       	x
	       end
	restrict_this_integer (generic function with 1 method)
	
	julia> p = restrict_this_integer()
	32
	
	julia> typeof(p)
	Int8

As we can see, the `::` within the function had the effect that the returned result would be represented as an 8-bit integer (`Int8`). Recall that this _only works in the context of a statement_ – thus simply entering `x::Int8` will yield a `typeassert` error, telling us that we have provided an integer literal, which Julia understands by default to be an `Int64, to be assigned to a variable and shaped as an `Int8` – which clearly doesn't work.

### Asserting a type

In every other context, `::` means 'I assert this value is of this particular type'. This is a great way to check a value for both abstract and concrete type. 

For instance, you are provided a variable `input_from_user`. How do you make sure it has the right kind of value? 

	julia> input_from_user = 128
	128
	
	julia> input_from_user::Int
	128	
	
	julia> input_from_user::Char
	ERROR: type: typeassert: expected Char, got Int64

As you can see, if you specify the correct abstract type, you get the value returned, whereas in our second assertion, where we asserted that the value was of the type `Char` (used to store individual characters), we got a `typeassert` error, which we can catch later on and return to ensure that we get the right type of value.

Remember that a type hierarchy is like a Venn diagram. Every `Int64` (a concrete type) is also an `Int` (an abstract type). Therefore, asserting `input_from_user::Int64` will also yield `128`, while asserting a different concrete type, such as `Int32`, will yield a `typeassert` error.

### Specifying acceptable function inputs

While we have not really discussed function inputs, you should be familiar with the general idea of a function – values go in, results go out. In Julia, you have the possibility to make sure your function only accepts values that you want it to. Consider creating a function that adds up only floating point numbers:

	function addition(x::Float64, y::Float64)
		x + y
	end

Calling it on two floating-point numbers will, of course, yield the expected result:

	julia> addition(3.14, 2.71)
	5.85

But giving it a simpler task will raise an error:

	julia> addition(1+1)
	ERROR: `addition` has no method matching addition(::Int64)

The real meaning of this error is a little complex, and refers to one of the base features of Julia called _multiple dispatch_. In Julia, you can create multiple functions with the same name that process different types of inputs, so e.g. an `add()` function can add up `Int` and `Float` inputs but concatenate `String` type inputs. Multiple dispatch effectively creates a table for every possible type for which the function is defined and looks up the right function at call time (so you can use both abstract and concrete types without a performance penalty). What the error complaining about the lack of a method matching `addition(::Int64)` means is that Julia cannot find a definition for the name `addition` that would accept an `Int64` value.

## Getting the type of a value

To obtain the type of a value, use the `typeof()` function:

	julia> typeof(32)
	Int64

`typeof()` is notable for treating tuples differently from most other collections. Calling `typeof()` on a tuple enumerates the types of each element, whereas calling it on, say, an `Array` value returns the `Array` notation of type (which looks for the largest common type among the values, up to `Any`):

	julia> typeof([1, 2, "a"])
	Array{Any,1}
	
	julia> typeof((1, 2, "a"))
	(Int64,Int64,ASCIIString)

Helpfully, the `isa()` function tells us whether something is a particular type:

	julia> isa("River", ASCIIString)
	true

And, of course, types have types (specifically, `DataType`)!

	julia> typeof("River")
	ASCIIString (constructor with 2 methods)
	
	julia> typeof(ans)
	DataType

### Exploring the type hierarchy

The `<:` operator can help you find out whether the left-side type is a subtype of the right-side type. Thus, we see that `Int64` is a subtype of `Int`, but `ASCIIString` isn't!

	julia> Int64 <: Int
	true	
	
	julia> ASCIIString <: Int
	false

To reveal the supertype of a type, use the `super()` function:

	julia> super(ASCIIString)
	DirectIndexString

## Composite types

Composite types, known to C coders as `structs`, are more complex object structures that you can define to hold a set of values. For instance, to have a Type that would accommodate geographic coordinates, you would use a composite type. Composite types are created with the `type` keyword:

	type GeoCoordinates
		lat::Float64
		lon::Float64
	end

We can then create a new value with this type:

	julia> home = GeoCoordinates(51.7519, 1.2578)
	GeoCoordinates(51.7519,1.2578)
	
	julia> typeof(home)
	GeoCoordinates (constructor with 2 methods)

The values of a composite object are, of course, accessible using the dot notation you might be used to from many other programming languages:

	julia> home.lat
	51.7519

In the same way, you can assign new values to it. However, these values have to comply with the type's definition in that they have to be _convertible_ to the type specified (in our case, `Float64`). So, for instance, an `Int64` input would be acceptable, since you can convert an `Int64` into a `Float64` easily. On the other hand, an `ASCIIString` would not do, since you cannot convert it into an `Int64`.

### Creating your very own immutable

An _immutable_ type is one which, once instantiated, cannot be changed. They are created the same way as composite types, except by using the `immutable` keyword in lieu of `type`:

	immutable GeoCoordinates
		lat::Float64
		lon::Float64
	end

Once instantiated, you cannot change the values. So if we would instantiate the immutable `GeoCoordinates` type with the values above, then attempt to change one of its values, we would get an error:

	julia> home.lat = 51.75
	ERROR: type GeoCoordinates is immutable

### Type unions

Sometimes, it's useful to have a single alias for multiple types. To do so, you can create a _type union_ using the constructor `Union`:

	julia> Numeric = Union(Int, Float64)
	Union(Float64, Int64)
	
	julia> 1::Numeric
	1
	
	julia> 3.14::Numeric
	3.14

## Conclusion

In this chapter, we learned about the way Julia's type system is set up. The issue of types will be at the background of most of what we do in the future, so feel free to refer back to this chapter as frequently as you feel the need to. In the next chapter, we will be exploring collections, a category of types that share one important property – they all act as 'envelopes' for multiple elements, each with their distinct type.

## Appendix: Julia types crib sheet

This is a selection of Julia's type tree, omitting quite a few elements. To see the full thing, you can use Tanmay Mohapatra's [`julia_types.jl`](https://github.com/tanmaykm/julia_types).

