# Chapter 6: Control flow

So far, we've looked at variables, types, strings and collections – in short, the things programs operate on. Control flow is where we start to delve into _how_ to engineer programs that do what we need them to.

We will be encountering two new things in this chapter. First, we will be coming across a number of _keywords_. Functional languages are generally known for having a minimum of keywords, but they usually still need some. A keyword is a word that has a particular role in the syntax of Julia. Keywords are _not functions_, and therefore are _not called_ (so no need for parentheses at the end!).

The second new concept is that of _blocks_. Blocks are chunks of expressions that are 'set aside' because they are, for instance, executed if a certain criterion is met. Blocks start with a starting expression, are followed by indented lines and end on an unindented line with the `end` keyword. A typical block would be:

```julia
	if variable1 > variable2
		println("Variable 1 is larger than Variable 2.")
	end
```

In Julia, blocks are normally indented as a matter of convention, but as long as they're validly terminated with the `end` keyword, it's all good. They are not surrounded by any special characters (such as curly braces `{}` that are common in Java or Javascript) or terminators after the condition (such as the colon `:` in Python). It is up to you whether you put the condition in parentheses `()`, but this is not required and is not an unambiguously useful feature at any rate. `if` and `elseif` are keywords, and as such they are not 'called' but invoked, so using the parentheses would not be technically appropriate.

## Conditions, truth values and comparisons

Much of control flow depends on the evaluation of particular conditions. Thus, for instance, an `if`/`else` construct may perform one action if a condition is true and a different one if it is false. Therefore, it is important to understand the role comparisons play in control flow and their effective (and idiomatic) use.

### Comparison operators

Julia has six comparison operators. Each of these acts differently depending on what types it is used on, therefore we'll take the effect of each of these operators in turn depending on their types. Unlike a number of programming languages, Julia's Unicode support means it can use a wider range of symbols as operators, which makes for prettier code but might be inadvisable – the difference between `>=` and `>` is less ambiguous than the difference between `≥` and `>`, especially at small resolutions.

| Operator | Name |
|----------|------|
| `==` or `isequal(x,y)` | equality |
| `!=` or `≠` | inequality |
| `<` | less than |
| `<=` or `≤` | less or equal |
| `>` | greater than |
| `>=` or `≥` | greater or equal |

#### Numeric comparison

When comparing numeric types, the comparison operators act as one would expect them, with some conventions that derive from the [IEEE 754 standard](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_floating_point) for floating point values.

Numeric comparison can accommodate three 'special' values: `-Inf`, `Inf` and `NaN`, which might be familiar from `R` or other programming languages. The paradigms for these three are that

- `NaN` is not equal to, larger than or less than anything, including itself (`NaN == NaN` yields `false`),
- `-Inf` and `Inf` are each equal to themselves but not the other (`-Inf == -Inf` yields `true` but `-Inf == Inf` is false),
- `Inf` is greater than everything except `NaN`,
- `-Inf` is smaller than everything except `NaN`.
- `-0` is equal to `0` or `+0`, but not smaller.

Julia also provides a function called `isequal()`, which at first sight appears to mirror the `==` operator, but has a few peculiarities:

- `NaN != NaN`, but `isequal(NaN, NaN)` yields true,
- `-0.0 == 0.0`, but `isequal(-0.0, 0.0)` yields false.

#### `Char` comparisons

`Char` comparison is based on the _integer value_ of every `Char`, which is its position in the code table (which you can obtain by using `int()`: `int('a') = 97`).

As a result, the following will hold:

- A `Char` of a lowercase letter will be larger than the `Char` of the same letter in uppercase: `'A' > 'a'` yields false,
- A `Char` plus or minus an integer yields a `Char`, which is the initial character offset by the integer: `'A' + 4` yields `'E'`.
- A `Char` minus another `Char` yields an `Int`, which is the offset between the two characters: `'E' - 'A'` yields `4`.

A lot of this is a little counter-intuitive, but what you need to remember is that `Char`s are merely numerical references to where the character is located, and this is used to do comparisons.


#### `String` comparisons

For `AbstractString` descendants, comparison will be based on _lexicographical comparison_ – or, to put it in human terms, where they would relatively be in a lexicon.

```julia
	julia> "truths" > "sausages"
	true

```

For words starting with the same characters in different cases, lowercase characters come after (i.e. are larger than) uppercase characters, much like in `Char` comparisons:

```julia
	julia> "Truths" < "truths"
	true

```

#### Chaining comparisons

Julia allows you to execute multiple comparisons – this is, indeed, encouraged, as it allows you to reflect mathematical relationships better and clearer in code. Comparison chaining associates from right to left:

```julia
	julia> 3 < π < 4
	true

	julia> 5 ≥ π < 12 > 3*e
	true

```

#### Combining comparisons

Comparisons can be combined using the boolean operators `&&` (`and`) and `||` (`or`). The truth table of these operators is

| Expression | `a` | `b` | result |
|:--------:|---------|--------|-----------|
| `a && b` | true    | true   | true  |
|          | false   | true   | false |
|          | true    | false  | false |
|          | false   | false  | false |
| `a || b` | true    | true   | true  |
|          | false   | true   | true  |
|          | true    | false  | true  |
|          | false   | false  | false |


Therefore,

```julia
	julia> π > 2 && π < 3
	false

	julia> π > 2 || π < 3
	true
```

### Truthiness

No, it's not the Colbert version. Truthiness refers to whether a variable that is not a boolean variable (`true` or `false`) is evaluated as true or false.

#### Definition truthiness

Julia is fairly strict with existence truthiness. A non-existent variable being tested for doesn't yield `false`, it yields an error.

```julia
	julia> if seahawks
	           println("We know the Seahawks' lineup.")
	       else
	           println("We don't know the Seahawks' lineup.")
	       end
	ERROR: seahawks not defined

```

Now let's create an empty array named `seahawks` which will, one day, accommodate their lineup:

```julia
	julia> seahawks = Array{ASCIIString}
	Array{ASCIIString,N}

```

Will existence of the array, empty though it may be, yield a truthy result? Not in Julia. It will yield, again, an error:

```julia
	julia> if seahawks
	           println("We know the Seahawks' lineup.")
	       else
	           println("We don't know the Seahawks' lineup.")
	       end
	ERROR: type: non-boolean (DataType) used in boolean context
```

#### Value truthiness

Nor will common values yield the usual truthiness results. 0, which in some languages would yield a `false`, will again result in an error:

```julia
	julia> seahawks = 0
	0

	julia> if seahawks
	           println("We know the Seahawks' lineup.")
	       else
	           println("We don't know the Seahawks' lineup.")
	       end
	ERROR: type: non-boolean (Int64) used in boolean context
```


The same goes for any other value. The bottom line, for you as a programmer, is that anything but `true` or `false` as the result of evaluating a condition yields an `error` and if you wish to make use of what you would solve with truthiness in another language, you might need to explicitly test for existence or value by using a function in your conditional expression that tests for existence or value, respectively.

#### Implementing definition truthiness

To implement definition truthiness, Julia helpfully provides the `isdefined()` function, which yields true if a symbol is defined. Be sure to pass the symbol, not the value, to the function by prefacing it with a colon `:`, as in this case:

```julia
	julia> if isdefined(:seahawks)
	           println("We know the Seahawks' lineup.")
	       else
	           println("We don't know the Seahawks' lineup.")
	       end
	We know the Seahawks' lineup.
```

## `if`/`elseif`/`else`, `?`/`:` and boolean switching

_Conditional evaluation_ refers to the programming practice of evaluating a block of code if, and only if, a particular _condition_ is met (i.e. if the expression used as the condition returns `true`). In Julia, this is implemented using the `if`/`elseif`/`else` syntax, the _ternary operator_, `?:` or boolean switching:

### `if`/`elseif`/`else` syntax

A typical conditional evaluation block consists of an `if` statement and a condition.

```julia
	if "A" == "A"
		println("Aristotle was right.")
	end

```

Julia further allows you to include as many further cases as you wish, using `elseif`, and a catch-all case that would be called `else` and have no condition attached to it:

```julia
	if weather == "rainy"
		println("Bring your umbrella.")
	elseif weather == "windy"
		println("Dress up warm!")
	elseif weather == "sunny"
		println("Don't forget sunscreen!")
	else
		println("Check the darn weather yourself, I have no idea.")

```

For `weather = "rainy"`, this predictably yields

```julia
	Bring your umbrella.

```

while for `weather = "warm"`, we get

```julia
	Check the darn weather yourself, I have no idea.
```

### Ternary operator `?`/`:`

The ternary operator is a useful way to put a reasonably simple conditional expression into a single line of code. The ternary operator _does not create a block_, therefore there is no need to suffix it with the `end` keyword. Rather, you enter the condition, then separate it with a `?` from the result of the true and the false outcomes, each in turn separated by a colon `:`, as in this case:

```julia
	julia> x = 0.3
	0.3

	julia> x < π/2 ? sin(x) : cos(x)
	0.29552020666133955
```

Ternary operators are great for writing simple conditionals quickly, but can make code unduly confusing. A number of style guides generally recommend using them sparingly. Some programmers, especially those coming from Java, like using a multiline notation, which makes it somewhat more legible while still not requiring a block to be created:

```julia
	julia> x < π/2 ?
	           sin(x) :
	           cos(x)
	0.29552020666133955
```

### Boolean switching `||` and `&&`

Boolean switching, which the Julia documentation refers to as _short-circuit evaluation_, allows you quickly evaluate using boolean operators. It uses two operators:

| Operator | Meaning |
|:--------:|---------|
| `a || b` | Execute `b` if `a` evaluates to `false` |
| `a && b` | Execute `b` if `a` evaluates to true	 |

These derive from the boolean use of `&&` and `||`, where `&&` means `and` and `||` means `or` - the logic being that for a `&&` operator, if `a` is false, `a && b` will be false, `b`'s value regardless. `||`, on the other hand, will necessarily be true if `a` is true. It might be a bit difficult to get one's head around it, so what you need to remember is the following equivalence:

- `if <condition> <statement>` is equivalent to `condition && statement`, and
- `if !<condition> <statement>` is equivalent to `condition || statement`.

Thus, let us consider the following:

```julia
	julia> is_this_a_prime = 7
	7
	
	julia> isprime(is_this_a_prime) && println("Yes, it is.")
	Yes, it is.
	
	julia> isprime(is_this_a_prime) || println("No, it isn't.")
	true

	julia> is_this_a_prime = 8
	8

	julia> isprime(is_this_a_prime) || println("No, it isn't.")
	No, it isn't.
```

It is rather counter-intuitive, but the alternative to it executing the code after the boolean operator is returning `true` or `false`. This should not necessarily trouble us, since our focus on getting our instructions executed. Outside the REPL, what each of these functions return is irrelevant. 

## `while`

With `while`, we're entering the world of repeated (or _iterative_) evaluation. The idea of `while` is quite simple: as long as a condition is met, execution will continue. The famed words of the pirate captain whose name has never been submitted to history can be rendered in a `while` clause thus:

```julia
	while morale != improved
		continue_flogging()
	end
```

`while`, along with `for`, is a _loop operator_, meaning - unsurprisingly - that it creates a loop that is executed over and over again until the conditional variable changes. While `for` loops generally need a limited range in which they are allowed to run, `while` loops can sometimes become infinite and turn into _runaway loops_. This is best avoided, not the least because it tends to crash systems or at the very least take up capacity for no good reason.

### Breaking a `while` loop: `break`

A `while` loop can be terminated by the `break` keyword prematurely (that is, before it has reached its condition). Thus, the following loop would only be executed five times, not ten:

```julia
	while i < 10
```

        i += 1
        println("The value of i is ", i)
        if i == 5
            break
        end
    end

The result is:

```julia
	The value of i is 1
	The value of i is 2
	The value of i is 3
	The value of i is 4
	The value of i is 5

```

This is because after five evaluations, the conditional would have evaluated to true and led to the `break` keyword breaking the loop.

### Skipping over results: `continue`

Let's assume we have suffered a grievous blow to our heads and forgotten all we knew about `for` loops and negation. Through some odd twist of fate, we absolutely _need_ to list all non-primes from one to ten, and we need to use a `while` loop for this.

The `continue` keyword instructs a loop to finish evaluating the current value of the iterator and go to the next. As such, you would want to put it as early as possible - there is no use instructing Julia to stop looking at the current iterator when

## `for`

Like `while`, `for` is a loop operator. Unlike `while`, it operates not _as long as_ a condition is met but rather until it has burned through an _iterable_. As we have seen, a number of objects consist of smaller chunks and are capable of being iterated over this, one by one. The archetypical iterable is a `Range` object. In the following, we will use a `Range` literal (created by a colon `:`) from one to 10 in steps of 2, and get Julia to tell us which numbers in that range are primes:

```julia
	julia> for i in 1:2:10
	           println(isprime(i))
	       end
	false
	true
	true
	true
	false

```

### Iterating over indexable collections

Other iterables include indexable collections:

```julia
	julia> for j in ['r', 'o', 'y', 'g', 'b', 'i', 'v']
	           println(j)
	       end
	r
	o
	y
	g
	b
	i
	v

```

This includes, incidentally, multidimensional arrays – but don't forget the direction of iteration (column by column, top-down):

```julia
	ulia> md_array = [1 1 2 3 5; 8 13 21 34 55; 89 144 233 377 610]
	3x5 Array{Int64,2}:
	  1    1    2    3    5
	  8   13   21   34   55
	 89  144  233  377  610

	julia> for each in md_array
	           println(each)
	       end
	1
	8
	89
	...
	55
	610

```

### Iterating over dicts

As we have seen, dicts are non-indexable. Nevertheless, Julia can iterate over a dict. There are two ways to accomplish this.

#### Tuple iteration

In tuple iteration, each key-value pair is seen as a tuple and returned as such:

```julia
	julia> for statistician in statisticians
	           println("$(statistician[1]) lived $(statistician[2]).")
	       end
	Galton lived 1822-1911.
	Pearson lived 1857-1936.
	Gosset lived 1876-1937.

```

While this does the job, it is not particularly graceful. It is, however, useful if we need to have the key and the value in the same object, such as in the case of conversion scripts often encountered in 'data munging'.

#### Key-value (`k,v`) iteration

A better way to iterate over a dict assigns two variables, rather than one, as iterators, one each for the key and the value. In this syntax, the above could be re-written as:

```julia
	julia> for (name,years) in statisticians
	           println("$name lived $years.")
	       end
```

### Iteration over strings

Iteration over a string results in iteration over each character. The individual characters are interpreted as objects of type `Char`:

```julia
	julia> for each in "Sausage"
	           println("$each is of the type $(typeof(each))")
	       end
	S is of the type Char
	a is of the type Char
	u is of the type Char
	s is of the type Char
	a is of the type Char
	g is of the type Char
	e is of the type Char
```

## Compound expressions: `begin`/`end` and `;`

A _compound expression_ is somewhat similar to a function in that it is a pre-defined sequence of functions that is executed one by one. Compound expressions allow you to execute small and concise blocks of code in sequence and return the result of the last calculation. There are two ways to create compound expressions, using a `begin`/`end` syntax creating a block or surrounding the compound expression with parentheses `()` and delimiting each instruction with `;`.

### `begin`/`end` blocks

A `begin`/`end` structure creates a block and returns the result of the last line evaluated.

```julia
	julia> circumference = begin
	           r = 3
	           2*r*π
	       end
	18.84955592153876
```

### `;` syntax

One of the benefits of compound expressions is the ability to put a lot into a small space. This is where the `;` syntax shines. Somewhat similar to anonymous functions or `lambda`s in other languages, such as Python, you can simplify the calculation above to

```julia
	julia> circumference = (r = 3; 2*r*π)
	18.84955592153876
```
